JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: Iraqi
forces launch
a long-awaited attack against
ISIS to take
back the key city of Mosul after
two years
under the terrorist's group
control.
Then: Donald Trump doubles down
on claims
of a rigged election, while
ongoing e-mail
leaks are a headache for the
Clinton campaign.
And U.S. health experts are
borrowing a practice
from Africa, using a system of
community health
workers to help struggling
areas.
JESSICA GONZALEZ, Diabetes
Sufferer: With
your doctor, you don't really
want to say
what you eat, so I'm able to
tell her like,
really, if I'm not going well,
or, you know,
if I sneaked and cheated.
I tell her the right things, and
she helps
me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The battle for
the Iraqi city
of Mosul is on.
Iraqi forces and their allies
opened an offensive
today to wrest the city from
Islamic State
forces.
The operation is being backed by
American
airstrikes and U.S. ground
troops in support
roles.
By this evening, both Iraqi and
U.S. military
officials said the assault is
ahead of schedule.
We will have a full report right
after the
news summary.
Government forces in Afghanistan
are reporting
progress against Taliban
fighters around a
key city in the south.
They say they have pushed back
insurgents
outside Lashkar Gah, the capital
of Helmand
Province, with the help of U.S.
airstrikes.
One Afghan commander estimated
that hundreds
of Taliban fighters were killed
in the last
24 hours alone.
In the U.S. presidential
campaign, Republican
Donald Trump hammered away again
today at
his claim that the election is
being rigged
against him.
And the ongoing furor over
Hillary Clinton's
e-mails took a new turn.
Lisa Desjardins has our report.
LISA DESJARDINS: Hillary Clinton
was off the
campaign trail today, but her
words from the
past were back in the news.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I didn't e-mail any classified
material to
anyone on my e-mail.
LISA DESJARDINS: That was March
of last year.
Clinton also said she never
received classified
e-mail.
But notes from the FBI's
investigation out
today indicate that, last year,
a senior State
Department official asked to
declassify one
e-mail that went to Clinton's
private server.
Separately, the official also
offered to let
the FBI put more agents
overseas.
The FBI refused to reclassify
the e-mail,
but cited someone in its records
division
as saying that that person
believed the State
Department had an agenda, which
involves minimizing
the classified nature of the
Clinton e-mails
in order to protect State
interests and those
of Clinton.
The State Department said today
it was simply
trying to understand the
classification.
MARK TONER, State Department
Spokesman: So
the allegation of any kind of
quid pro quo
is inaccurate and doesn't align
with the facts.
LISA DESJARDINS: Late today, the
FBI also
said there was no quid pro quo
involved.
Meanwhile:
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
This is a rigged system, folks.
LISA DESJARDINS: Donald Trump's
repeated words
this weekend questioning the
integrity of
the election reached a new level
on Twitter
this morning.
He wrote: "Of course there is
large scale
voter fraud happening on and
before election
day.
Why do Republican leaders deny
what is going
on?"
On Sunday, Trump's V.P. nominee,
Mike Pence,
seemed to be on a different
page.
CHUCK TODD, Moderator, "Meet The
Press": Will
you accept the results of the
election?
GOV.
MIKE PENCE (R-IN), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
We will absolutely accept the
results of the
election.
LISA DESJARDINS: But today near
Cincinnati,
Pence was pushing the idea of
election problems.
GOV.
MIKE PENCE: Voter fraud cannot
be tolerated
by anyone in this nation,
because it disenfranchises
Republicans, independents,
Democrats, conservatives
and liberals in America.
LISA DESJARDINS: In Washington,
the Democratic
V.P. nominee, Tim Kaine, seized
on the Trump
criticism, while making a stop
at his current
workplace, Capitol Hill.
SEN.
TIM KAINE (D-VA), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
When you criticize the system,
who are you
criticizing?
You're criticizing American
voters, and you're
criticizing local elected
officials in cities
and counties and states who have
been running
elections, you know, for decades
and decades
and decades.
The criticism is completely
unjustified, and
it's a guy who's whining because
he's a big
bully who's getting beaten, and
now he's starting
to whine.
LISA DESJARDINS: And amid the
increasing tension,
investigators are looking into
pre-election
violence.
Over the weekend, someone threw
a firebomb
through the window of a local
Republican office
in North Carolina.
No one was hurt.
Officials from both parties have
disavowed
the attack.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will look more
closely at
Donald Trump's warning about a
rigged contest
and its implications after the
news summary.
In Syria, the ravaged city of
Aleppo may get
a brief respite this week from
Russian airstrikes
and Syrian ground assaults.
Russia's military announced
today a humanitarian
pause for eight hours on
Thursday.
But the U.S. State Department
dismissed the
idea as too little, too late.
Meanwhile, Russian and Syrian
airstrikes continued
today, killing dozens.
The attacks came as European
Union leaders
met in Luxembourg and condemned
Russia's air
campaign.
FEDERICA MOGHERINI, Foreign
Policy Chief,
European Union: Priority number
one now is
to save Aleppo, to save the
people of Aleppo.
And that is why our strong call
is on Russia
and on the Syrian regime to stop
the bombing
on Aleppo and to continue talks
with the U.S.
and other key players on the
ground to avoid
the catastrophe, first of all,
the humanitarian
catastrophe in the city.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The E.U. foreign
ministers
stopped short of agreeing to
impose sanctions
against Moscow.
Hard-liners in Iran released
video today of
an Iranian-American businessman
who's been
held there for a year.
Siamak Namazi was arrested in
2015 just days
after the Iran nuclear deal was
adopted.
There's no word on the charges
against him.
Namazi's father was arrested
later, after
going to Iran to try to win his
son's release.
Back in this country, Vice
President Joe Biden
hoped that the cancer moonshot
initiative
he leads is going to double the
pace of research.
Meeting with President Obama,
the vice president
talked up efforts to speed the
development
of diagnostics and new drugs.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United
States: There is a need for a
greater sense
of urgency, because there is --
there are
available answers now to some
cancers, and
there is enormous opportunity in
sharing data.
I am confident, absolutely
confident that
we will be able to accomplish in
the next
five years what otherwise would
have taken
us 10 years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The $1 billion
cancer moonshot
began eight months ago.
It aims for collaboration across
government,
industry, and medicine.
The nation's high school
graduation rate has
reached a new record high.
According to federal data
released today,
83.2 percent of students earned
their diplomas
on time in the past school year.
Rates improved among all racial
and ethnic
groups, despite the fact that
the test scores
in math and reading have been
dropping.
And stocks fell on Wall Street
today, as declining
oil prices dragged down energy
shares.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost nearly
52 points to close at 18086.
The Nasdaq fell 14 points, and
the S&P 500
slipped six.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the fight
for the last ISIS stronghold in
Iraq; rhetoric
inciting worries of a rigged
election; the
rise of Europe's far right; and
much more.
Now: Mosul and the start of
operations to
retake Iraq's second largest
city from the
Islamic State group.
Jeffrey Brown will speak with a
former U.S.
ambassador to Iraq in a moment,
but, first,
chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner reports on today's
events.
MARGARET WARNER: Gunfire sounded
all day,
across the outskirts of Mosul.
Columns of smoke billowed from
artillery fire
and U.S. coalition airstrikes
and from oil
ignited by ISIS fighters to
blind attacking
planes.
Long anti-ISIS convoys advanced,
and, by late
in the day, the overall Iraqi
commander issued
a confident assessment.
LT.
GEN.
TALIB SHAGHATI, Iraqi Commander
(through translator):
The operations are going very
well and according
to plan.
Sometimes, we are ahead of the
plan because
of the high morale and the
fighters' strong
will to fight the Islamic State
group and
liberate Mosul, which has been
under ISIS
rule for the past two years.
MARGARET WARNER: For the Iraqi
army, the campaign
for Mosul is by far its largest
operation
yet against the Islamic State.
U.S. intelligence estimates that
up to 4,500
ISIS fighters are in the city.
Other estimates run to 8,000.
LT.
GEN.
STEPHEN TOWNSEND, U.S. Army:
This may prove
to be a long and tough battle,
but the Iraqis
have prepared for it, and we
will stand by
them.
MARGARET WARNER: Complicating
matters, balancing
the various factions taking part
in the fight.
Kurdish forces began today by
seizing several
towns on the eastern fringes of
Mosul.
They will be part of a
five-pronged assault,
including Iraqi army brigades,
plus Sunni
tribal fighters and police.
The ultimate drive into Mosul
will likely
be made by Iraqi special forces.
Providing air cover and
assisting on the ground
is the American military,
including special
operations troops.
Shiite militias backed by Iran
are also taking
part, but they have been accused
of atrocities
against Sunnis in other cities
and may be
kept out of Mosul proper.
Meanwhile, Turkey's president,
Recep Tayyip
Erdogan, complained of being
left out of the
Mosul offensive.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
President (through
translator): Look now.
The operation in Mosul has
started.
The operation continues.
And what do they say?
Turkey shouldn't enter Mosul.
How can I do that?
I share 350 kilometers of border
with Iraq,
and I am under threat on that
border.
MARGARET WARNER: Erdogan said
again he will
keep some 3,000 Turkish-trained
fighters in
northernmost Iraq, despite
objections from
Baghdad.
As the fighting starts in
earnest, concerns
are also rising over the more
than one million
civilians still in the city.
The U.N. and other organizations
say they're
preparing for up to 200,000
refugees.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JEFFREY BROWN: And now
perspectives of James
Jeffrey, the U.S. ambassador to
Iraq from
2010 to 2012, and currently
fellow at the
Washington Institute, a think
tank and policy
analysis group.
Welcome to you.
JAMES JEFFREY, Former U.S.
Ambassador to Iraq:
Thank you, Jeffrey.
JEFFREY BROWN: Remind us first
why this city
and its capture is so important.
JAMES JEFFREY: As we just heard,
it's the
last citadel of ISIL in Iraq.
It's the second largest city in
the country.
It's the center of the Sunni
Arab third of
Iraq, if you will, its culture
in that country.
And if it falls, then ISIS is
pushed back
to its headquarters deep in
Syria, in Raqqa,
and that could spell the end of
ISIS.
So, that's a very, very
important development.
JEFFREY BROWN: When ISIS
originally took Mosul
and other cities, the Iraqi army
at that point
was collapsing.
There is a sense now that it's
strong enough
to do this.
How difficult will it be?
How long do you think it might
take?
JAMES JEFFREY: As we saw in the
news clip
from Margaret Warner, it's a
very eclectic
force, but it numbers some
50,000 or 60,000
people on the ground, with a
tremendous amount
of American and other Western
artillery and
airpower supporting these
people, including,
for the first time, advisory
units right up
in the front lines.
This will take weeks, like the
Fallujah battle
in 2004 also against ISIS's
predecessor, al-Qaida
in Iraq.
But, in the end, I think there
is only going
to be one outcome, and that will
be defeat
of ISIS.
JEFFREY BROWN: There have also
been reports
inside the city of underground
resistance.
When ISIS first went into Mosul,
they were
welcomed by many in the city.
What happened in the interim?
JAMES JEFFREY: Al-Qaida has
always had a presence
before it became ISIS in Mosul.
It was a problem when I was
there in 2010
to 2012.
But there's no doubt that part
of the population
welcomed ISIS when it came in,
because it
felt was being oppressed by the
Shia majority
and the troops sent up by the
Shia -- largely
Shia government.
But that changed over time.
As in every other city we have
seen that have
been liberated, the people,
regardless of
their ethnic and religious
background, welcome
the people who come in.
They can't stand living under
ISIS.
JEFFREY BROWN: That problem,
though, of the
initial welcoming brings us what
might happen
in the aftermath, right, of
retaking Mosul.
JAMES JEFFREY: Exactly.
JEFFREY BROWN: Because it raises
many other
questions.
JAMES JEFFREY: Well, the first
one is the
humanitarian, refugee, and food
and relief
supplies.
That is under the control of the
U.N., the
Iraqi government and the Kurdish
regional
government, in coordination with
the Iraqi
government, all being watched
closely by the
United States.
That will be messy.
It always is.
But these people, if there's one
thing, they
have had experience with some
eight million
refugees in that region in the
last two years.
They will, in the end, be able
to do it.
JEFFREY BROWN: But there are
fears, though,
about the humanitarian crisis,
right?
JAMES JEFFREY: Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely.
And I think, as I said, we will
get plenty
of stories about people in
inadequate tents,
inadequate sewage and such.
But, in the end, I think that
enough food,
supplies will come through.
The bigger question is, who will
secure this
place, who will govern it, and
what's going
to happen to Iraq after the ISIS
threat is
gone?
JEFFREY BROWN: Even including
who marches
into the city in the first
place, right, as
Margaret was talking about,
whether it's Iraqi
forces or militia forces.
JAMES JEFFREY: Exactly.
And I think the deal right now
is that the
Iraqi forces, spearheaded by the
counterterrorism
force, which is very, very good,
and will
have a lot of American advisers
with them
and supporting them, will go in
and do the
heavy fighting inside the city.
Then Sunni police who have been
trained from
the region itself will come in
to secure the
city.
The trick will be to keep the
Peshmerga forces,
the Kurdish forces, away from
the center of
the city, but they have
basically agreed to
stop, as I understand it.
We don't know if the popular
mobilization
forces, these largely Shia
militias, some
of whom are under the thumb of
Iran, will
adhere to this deal, or whether
they will
try to push in, as they have
before.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, that's what
I'm wondering.
How confident are you or are we?
Because this is not the first
time that Mosul
has been recaptured, right?
So, how confident can we be
that, this time,
the forces taking it will get it
right?
JAMES JEFFREY: Well, some of
these Shia militias,
Ahl al-Haq, the Mahdi Army,
tried to kill
me and my people for years in
Iraq, so I'm
not too confident on anything
they promise,
to be honest.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
JAMES JEFFREY: But I will say,
they're not
the majority.
The Iraqi government and most
Iraqis understand
that they have to bring back the
Sunni Arab
20, 25 percent of the
population.
It won't work with these Shia
militias running
amok in these areas.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, briefly,
ISIS itself,
if it gets kicked out of Mosul,
what then?
JAMES JEFFREY: It will fall back
on its capital,
Raqqa in Eastern Syria, but it's
a dusty little
town compared to Mosul.
And it's being pressed by
Kurdish and Syrian
opposition forces right now from
the north,
as well as American and
American-supported
forces.
So I think that the end will be
near for ISIS.
And then we will face all of the
other problems
in the Middle East that ISIS has
covered up
over the last two years.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
Ambassador James
Jeffrey, thank you very much.
JAMES JEFFREY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back to this
country now.
As we heard earlier, Donald
Trump continues
to claim that the presidential
election process
is rigged against him.
That claim seems to be
resonating with some
voters.
Just one-third of Republicans
say they have
a great deal of confidence that
their votes
will be counted fairly this
election.
That's according to a recent
Associated Press
poll.
For more on all this, we are
joined by Richard
Hasen.
He's professor of law at the
University of
California, Irvine.
He's author of the Election Law
Blog.
And Al Cardenas is a Republican
strategist.
He served as chairman of the
Republican Party
of Florida during the
presidential recount
in 2000.
And we welcome both of you to
the "NewsHour."
Al Cardenas, to you first.
Donald Trump is stepping up
these warnings.
He tweeted just a short time ago
-- and I'm
quoting -- he said: "Of course
there's large-scale
voter fraud happening on and
before Election
Day."
He asked, he said, "Why do
Republican leaders
deny what's going on?
It's so naive."
Is there large-scale voter fraud
happening
in this country?
AL CARDENAS, Republican
Strategist: Oh, my,
there isn't, hasn't been.
And our country has been
spending 200-plus
years to get it just right.
The checks and balances in the
electoral process
is amazing.
I know our guest will know more
about it than
I do.
But we have state elected --
state officials
elected or appointed who are in
charge of
the overall state process.
And every local government,
counties or municipalities,
have supervisor elections who
are elected
or appointed.
And then you have local
canvassing boards
made up oftentimes of judges.
And they're part of this whole
processes.
Everyone who works in these
voting precincts
get trained, gets warned about
violating the
laws, gets warned about the
criminal implications
of violating the law.
We have a whole process in
America.
And in 200-some years, we have
never, ever
had a national election that's
been impacted
by fraud, not even close.
Even in Florida, where I served
as chairman
in the famous recount, it -- was
that an issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Richard Hasen,
what is your
take on this?
What is the likelihood that this
process could
be rigged, as Donald Trump
charges?
RICK HASEN, University of
California, Irvine:
If you're talking about rigging
the way that
Donald Trump is talking about
rigging, I would
say the chances are basically
none.
It's impossible.
He's talking about people going
into the polling
place and voting five or 10 or
15 times.
He said this would happen in
certain areas
of Pennsylvania.
It seems to be, from what his
surrogate Rudy
Giuliani said, in minority
areas, that Democrats
are going to steal the votes by
impersonating
other people.
That's just now how -- in the
rare times when
voter fraud occur, that's just
not how elections
are stolen in this country, and
not on the
kind of scale that could affect
a presidential
election, which would the
cooperation of tens
of thousands of people to try to
commit voter
fraud under the noses of
election officials
and party officials who are
watching the whole
process.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Richard
Hasen, you say
-- I hear you saying it's
possible to do this
on a small scale.
Is that right?
RICHARD HASEN: Well, the kind of
fraud that
we do occasionally see in this
country is
absentee ballot fraud.
That occurs because voting takes
place outside
the presence of election
officials.
Usually, it involves buying
votes or stealing
ballots out of people's
mailboxes, and then
voting them in a particular way.
But we haven't seen that on the
kind of scale
that could affect a presidential
election.
And that's not the kind of fraud
Donald Trump
has been talking about.
He was talking about the lack of
voter I.D.,
strict voter I.D. law in
Pennsylvania and
that would allow someone to go
into the polling
place, and he literally said,
vote five or
10 or 15 times.
That just doesn't happen.
For a study I did, I looked from
the 1980s
on to find a single election
anywhere in the
United States where it could
have been called
into question because of that
kind of fraud,
and I can't find a single
instance anywhere
in the country.
That kind of fraud would be a
stupid way to
steal the election, and it just
doesn't happen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Al Cardenas, what
makes you
so confident that this couldn't
happen?
AL CARDENAS: Well, I lived it in
2000.
I was party chairman in Florida.
We had over 250 lawyers involved
and volunteering
in the state.
We had over 40 lawsuits.
We had election supervisors.
We had judges in every single
county recounting
every vote, tabulating,
retabulating the votes,
determining whether votes were
fairly cast
or not.
There were challenges being made
by lawyers
from both parties as to votes
that had not
been accepted.
The whole process took 37 days,
thousands
of people, thousands of hours.
And not once, not once did we
find intent
to defraud the process
electorally.
The press spent millions of
dollars after
that and went through its own
process.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes, they did.
AL CARDENAS: And we didn't find
fraud in the
process.
Let me tell you, Judy, what
really bothers
me here is that America is a
beacon of light
for people all throughout the
world who want
their democracies to work our
way.
We are the idols of most
countries.
We are asked to oversee
elections in other
countries.
We in this country know that
transparency
works.
We appreciate and frankly adore
the right
to have the free, peaceful
transfer of power
from the president to at the
eventual winner.
We in America have always
celebrated the way
we have elections.
To tarnish it with unproven
facts, tarnish
it with accusations, to me, it
is just a shame.
It shouldn't be done.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Richard
Hasen, we also
hear Donald Trump saying to his
supporters
from time to time, you need to
go out and
you need to watch people voting
to make sure
everything is being done on the
up and up,
words to that effect.
How would that work, for people
to take it
upon themselves to watch the
voting process?
RICHARD HASEN: Well, you know,
there are ways
to watch the voting process.
There are ways to be election
observers.
And, in most places, you have
Democrats and
Republicans and nonpartisan
groups like the
League of Women Voters watching
the vote count.
And those people are trained.
And they know what to do.
And they know not to interfere
with voters.
I'm very concerned that it looks
like Trump
is telling people to take
matters into their
own hands.
He said, after you vote in your
own place,
go to those other areas and see
what's going
on there.
I'm worried especially in states
where there
is an open-carry law and people
could be taking
firearms to the polling place.
We need to have an election
where people are
not intimidated, where they feel
free to go
into the polling place and vote
their conscience.
And I think what he is doing is
dangerous.
It's dangerous both on after
Election Day
and after Election Day, where,
if he claims
the vote count was rigged, who
knows if people
might take into their own hands
to be violent?
I mean, we really -- we take our
peaceful
transitions for granted.
And I think we can't this time
around.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly, Al
Cardenas,
how would that work?
I mean, if voters in your home
state of Florida
decided they were going to watch
other polling
places, what would that mean for
the election?
AL CARDENAS: Well, we have a
ballot integrity
initiative every election cycle,
where lawyers
and others volunteer.
They man these phones.
If there is a voter that feels
they have been
intimidated, harassed or worse,
they can call
a number.
These lawyers are activated.
They go to local elected
officials, and the
matter is immediately
investigated.
I can tell you, election after
election -- I
have been chairman of the party
for a long
time -- these instances are
rare.
Now, if somebody is going to be
enticed to
go and intimidate voters, well,
that's a whole
different story, as Richard just
mentioned.
That cannot be tolerated, and
law enforcement
needs to step in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we're going
to be continuing,
of course, to follow this
between now and
Election Day three weeks from
tomorrow.
Al Cardenas, Richard Hasen, we
thank you both.
RICHARD HASEN: Thank you.
AL CARDENAS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Online, read how
the Clinton
campaign is ramping up spending
in a swing
state media blitz.
You can find that on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And staying on politics, we are
joined now,
as we are every Monday, by Amy
Walter of The
Cook Political Report and Tamara
Keith of
NPR.
Hello to both of you.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Hello.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Hello,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, we just heard
from these
two gentlemen how hard, if not
impossible,
Amy, it is to rig an election.
AMY WALTER: Yes, it is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why then is
Donald Trump continuing
to talk about it?
AMY WALTER: It's pretty simple.
It's about trying to suppress
voters from
turning out, and specifically
people who would
support Hillary Clinton, from
turning out
and voting.
If you're talking about going
into certain
neighborhoods and literally
standing there
to watch people vote, that says
make sure
that those people don't come out
and vote.
Now, the danger of making saying
that the
election overall is rigged, vs.
they're trying
to steal it, is, if you say it's
rigged, then
you're also saying to your own
voters, well,
why bother even going, because
it's probably
going to turn out badly anyway?
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what does
that mean, Tamara?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, and he
really has shifted
into more broadly not just
talking about something
could be happening in some
neighborhoods.
Now he's saying the whole thing
is rigged,
that the media is rigging it,
that there is
something bigger going on.
And it does raise the question,
how are his
voters going to respond to that?
And that is not clear.
So, yes, we're in uncharted
territory.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it's
something that he
continues to write about, to
tweet about.
All right, I want to turn you,
Tam, to the
Clinton campaign today dealing
with more e-mails,
this time, as we heard in Lisa's
report a
little while ago, accusations
there was this
discussion between the State
Department and
the FBI about whether to lower
the classification
of one e-mail among those that
were sent to
Hillary Clinton.
What are we to make of this?
And then there was discussion of
a quid pro
quo because, in that same
conversation, they
were taking about the FBI
getting more employees
overseas.
TAMARA KEITH: Right.
And this comes from FBI
investigative notes
that were released today.
And it's one of those things
where both the
FBI and the State Department say
there is
no quid pro quo, there was no
quid and there
was no quo, that what the State
Department
wanted, they didn't get, what
the FBI wanted,
they didn't get, and that, in
fact, it was
the FBI -- somebody at the FBI,
name redacted,
who asked an official at the
State Department
about something.
So, it wasn't the State
Department that was
initiating the apparently
nonexistent quid
pro quo.
But here's what really matters,
is that Donald
Trump is now out with a video
where he's talking
straight to camera saying
Hillary Clinton
did this thing that's shady.
Now, the Clinton campaign says
they didn't
know anything about it, but what
it is, is
another day where there are
headlines that
say Hillary Clinton, e-mail,
FBI.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Amy, we're
two days, two
nights away from third and final
debate.
How damaging is it for her?
AMY WALTER: Well, her name is
not involved
in this at all, so that's one
helpful piece
if you're Hillary Clinton.
But it does -- to Tam's point,
it's not just
that it's the FBI and e-mail and
Hillary Clinton
in the headline.
It's also the sense that the
whole entire
process was a political process,
where the
State Department was looking out
specifically
for Hillary Clinton, trying to
protect her
and her e-mails from getting FBI
scrutiny.
This question, as well as some
of the other
questions that were raised in
some of her
speeches, may be part of the
debate, where
she's going to be asked
specifically to answer
some of the stuff she said in
private, but
hasn't said in public.
I thought her answer at the her
answer at
the last debate, this was sort
of Lincolnesque,
I sort of imagine myself being
Abraham Lincoln,
fell really, really flat.
If that's her answer to more
pointed questions,
which I think she will get from
Chris Wallace,
the FOX News reporter who's
going to be the
moderator, that's not going to
work really
well.
TAMARA KEITH: So, the hilarious
thing about
that Lincoln remark that fell
kind of flat
in the debate is, that's exactly
what the
speech transcript said, that she
was actually
talking about the "Lincoln"
movie.
AMY WALTER: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was in the
speech.
TAMARA KEITH: That some -- that
a Brazilian
bank paid her a lot of money to
give a speech
where she talked about the movie
"Lincoln."
AMY WALTER: The movie "Lincoln,"
right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is her camp -- is
she prepared,
Tam, based on your reporting, to
talk about
this some more, to give more of
an explanation
about what's going on?
TAMARA KEITH: She is certainly
preparing.
That's for sure, because she's
been off the
trail for several days.
She's not going to be on the
trail today,
tomorrow.
And then there is the debate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's go
back to Donald
Trump.
Today, we know, by now, there
have been, Amy,
nearly a dozen women who have
come forward
and said that Donald Trump was
either groping
or in some way sexually
aggressive toward
them.
Today, what's different is that
his wife,
Melania, has done an interview
with CNN.
And we're going to show you --
she was asked
by Anderson Cooper about that
"Access Hollywood"
tape in which we heard him
talking.
Hear's what Melania Trump had to
say.
MELANIA TRUMP, Wife of Donald
Trump: I said
to my husband that, you know,
the language
is inappropriate, it's not
acceptable, and
I was surprised, because that is
not the man
that I know.
And, as you can see from the
tape, the cameras
were not on.
It was only a mike.
And I wonder if they even knew
that the mike
was on, because it was kind of
boy talk, and
he was led on, like egged on
from the host
to say dirty and bad stuff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Amy, this is
10 days after
that tape came out.
It's after we have seen Donald
Trump losing
support among women voters.
Does this make...
AMY WALTER: And now -- right,
they put his
wife out...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
AMY WALTER: ... which she can
help to sort
of soften the edge on this.
But her answer and her -- the
way she is defending
her husband is not much
different from what
he's saying, which is basically,
this was
locker room talk.
But when you look at the polling
that has
been taking place since this
locker room talk
came out, you're right.
He lost support in the polls.
He's losing support among women.
We're now hearing about -- when
we're looking
at the polls, we're talking now
about a historic
gender gap.
We may not have seen a gender
gap like this
in -- certainly in the last 30
or 40, 50 -- actually,
I think it goes back 50 years.
And then the Washington Post
poll that came
out this weekend, when asked do
you think
that this issue that was raised
in the tape,
his treatment of women, is
important, is it
a legitimate issue, 55 percent
of voters said
this is a legitimate issue.
So, writing it off to boys
talking, locker
room talk in the wake, not just
of the audio,
but the women who came forward,
I don't think
it's going to do much good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Tam, the
Clinton camp
seems to be -- they're out now
talking about
how their chances have improved,
expanding
the battleground now.
TAMARA KEITH: They're expanding
the map.
Bernie Sanders will be
campaigning in Arizona,
Arizona, tomorrow.
They are running a week of ads
in Texas, very,
very red Texas.
In Arizona, they're going to
spend about $2
million.
It's basically a tossup now and
they think
it's a possible pickup.
And there's the added benefit of
making your
opponent have to compete in a
state where
he shouldn't have to compete.
He should be focused on the
battlegrounds
that he really needs to win and
where he is
struggling, and now they are
expanding the
map.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly.
AMY WALTER: And I think that
what she really
wants to do is run up the score
to show that
there is a mandate here.
The problem for that is, she may
get a lot
of votes, a lot of electoral
votes, more than
Barack Obama got, but she's
still going to
come into office with an overall
disapproval
rating that's higher than
anybody in recent
times has come into the
presidency.
So, you want more votes, but
it's not necessarily
going to change the way that
people see her,
not more positively, at least.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter,
Tamara Keith, thank
you both, Politics Monday.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we want you
to tune in
this coming Wednesday at 9:00
p.m. Eastern
for our special live coverage of
that final
presidential debate.
And, in the meantime, you can
watch all the
presidential and vice
presidential debates
dating back to 1960.
That's at our new Web site,
watchthedebates.org.
LLOYD BENTSEN (D), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
Senator, you are no Jack
Kennedy.
GERALDINE FERRARO (D), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
I almost resent, Vice President
Bush, your
patronizing...
MITT ROMNEY (R), Presidential
Candidate: Whole
binders full of women.
MICHAEL DUKAKIS (D),
Presidential Candidate:
That I have opposed the death
penalty during
all of my life.
JOHN YANG: Interact with all the
general election
debates on our Web site,
watchthedebates.org.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But first: As
Europe continues
to struggle with the refugee
crisis, Denmark's
government is claiming success
in reducing
the number of people claiming
asylum there,
and says other countries want to
copy its
methods.
Despite that success, the Danish
electorate
is moving to the right.
After complaints, people have
filed charges
of racism against an extreme
right-wing party
which has been handing out what
it calls asylum
sprays.
From Thisted in Northwest
Denmark, Malcolm
Brabant reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In a small town
250 miles
from cosmopolitan Copenhagen,
the new Party
of the Danes is distributing
what it calls
asylum spray, ostensibly as a
defense against
potential immigrant sex
attackers.
The campaign has been condemned
as provocative
and xenophobic.
Nonetheless, the spray finds
several takers.
WOMAN (through translator): It's
my daughter
that needs it, the way Danish
society is at
the moment.
WOMAN (through translator): They
can't just
come here and do whatever they
want, like
staring at girls in nightclubs
and stuff.
They shouldn't be allowed do
that.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The spray was
conceived by
party leader Daniel Carlsen, who
admits denying
the Holocaust as a teenager, and
is now trying
to win support to run for
Parliament.
MAN: I think we have too many
people in Denmark
from Arab countries.
I don't like it.
I don't like Muslims.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This region of
Denmark is
fertile ground for the right.
And even though the cans only
contain hair
spray, the symbolism touches a
chord.
WOMAN (through translator): You
never know
what can happen.
Just a month ago, I was followed
home on my
bike.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Organizations
like the United
Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees think
what you're doing is disgusting.
What's your response?
DANIEL CARLSEN, Leader, Party of
the Danes:
They are working for and
promoting an invasion
to Europe, an invasion that, by
time, will
replace the indigenous Europeans
here with
people from the non-Western
world.
I think that is disgusting.
And what their politics are
resulting in,
we see that in Europe every day
now.
We see rapes, like the incidents
in Cologne.
We have seen terror attacks in
Brussels, in
Paris, in Copenhagen, and that's
only the
last year.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In an
increasingly hostile
atmosphere, Syrian musician Nour
Amora has
found acceptance.
We met Amora just over a year
ago, as the
Danish government slashed
welfare benefits
for refugees in an attempt to
make the country
less attractive to asylum
seekers.
NOUR AMORA, Syrian Refugee: I
make this concert
to know the people, to know the
artists, the
musicians, to make something
with them, to
work, yes.
I don't come to Denmark to
sleep.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Amora has been
true to his
word.
He supports himself and his
small family with
two jobs.
And on this day, he was
entertaining schoolchildren
and educating them about the war
in Syria.
Music has opened doors that are
closed to
other refugees.
NOUR AMORA (through translator):
I tell my
friends that now it is not good
to come to
Denmark because of the
government, but if
you do come, you will find that
the Danish
people are really nice.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Singer Leila
Rong Hanna was
born in Denmark.
She has Syrian and Norwegian
heritage, but
has dissuaded relatives in
Damascus and the
Syrian port of Latakia from
fleeing to Europe.
LEILA RONG HANNA, Musician:
Because this is
not the perfect life you get.
It's quite difficult, not only
the journey,
if you survive in the journey,
but also when
you come here.
It's quite uphill.
MALCOLM BRABANT: That's music to
the ears
of many at the Danish
Parliament, because
it's a sign that the country's
policies are
working.
One of the most satisfied is
Martin Henriksen
of the anti-immigrant Danish
People's Party,
whose support keeps the
center-right government
in power.
MARTIN HENRIKSEN, Danish
People's Party: Well,
last year, about 20,000 asylum
seekers come
to Denmark.
And this year, we expected
10,000.
This year, we are about around
5,000 at this
time.
But 5,000 is still too high.
We want to -- actually, in the
perfect world,
we want to reduce the numbers,
so that nobody
will come to Denmark as an
asylum seeker.
So we're not quite there yet.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But Peter
Christensen's recently
constituted New Right Party
claims it's even
tougher on immigration.
It's attracted significant
support in recent
surveys after pledging to stop
immigration
altogether, instantly deport
foreigners convicted
of crimes, take Denmark out of
the U.N. Refugee
Convention and ban head scarves
in schools
and public offices.
Critics fear this swing to the
right is reminiscent
of 1930s Europe.
PETER CHRISTENSEN, New Right
Party: I can't
see how that should compare to
the situation
in the '30s, with the
discrimination of the
Jews, aggressive nations
attacking each other
in the '40s, the Holocaust.
There's no comparison
whatsoever.
What we're talking about is, we
want to implement
a foreign policy that has been
normal until
40, 50 years ago.
It's not -- nobody has the right
to come to
Denmark.
They have right now because we
are in the
conventions.
But, I mean, morally, nobody has
the right
to come to Denmark.
It's not like we are expelling
any people.
We're just saying we want to
have control
of who comes into our country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Denmark's
deterrence of asylum
seekers has enabled it to it
close 17 refugee
centers, including this one in a
former psychiatric
hospital.
The policies worry not only
people fleeing
violence in the Middle East.
Chen Man is concerned about the
time it's
taking to process her asylum
application.
She spent seven years in jail in
China for
belonging to Falun Gong, the
outlawed spiritual
movement.
CHEN MAN, Chinese Asylum Seeker:
I feel, like,
worried, because I feel, like,
unstable for
my security.
I need a kind of protection from
the nation.
But if I cannot have, the risk
of myself is
going back to China and facing
the imprisonment
again.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Chen Man
believes Denmark's
hostility towards asylum seekers
is a sign
of weakness.
CHEN MAN: Yes, this is not the
way to resolve
the problem.
And it's also a kind of way to
show the fear
inside, because if you are
strong enough,
you can handle that without
building up a
wall, but a bridge.
MALCOLM BRABANT: So what's the
source of Denmark's
right turn?
Is it from the population or
political ideology?
Nils Holtug is the director of
migration studies
at Copenhagen University.
NILS HOLTUG, Copenhagen
University: I think,
to some extent, politicians have
probably
been responding to what are real
worries amongst
Danes.
But they have also been driving
those worries,
so -- especially the Danish
People's Party,
but also some of the new parties
that are
coming up now.
I think the Dane Party is very
worrying.
And it was established by former
members of
a Nazi movement in Denmark.
So I'm actually quite worried
about that.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Are you a Nazi?
DANIEL CARLSEN: No.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But you were a
National Socialist
before?
DANIEL CARLSEN: I'm a National
Democrat.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But you were a
National Socialist
before.
DANIEL CARLSEN: Before.
MALCOLM BRABANT: So, are you
saying you're
a reformed National Socialist?
DANIEL CARLSEN: No, I'm a
National Democrat.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But you were a
National Socialist
-- and that was the Nazi Party
-- before.
What's happening in Denmark is
consistent
with a surge to the right across
Europe.
One of the more controversial
pieces of legislation
enacted here was the so-called
jewelry law,
which authorized the authorities
to confiscate
the assets of those migrants and
refugees
deemed wealthy enough to be able
to pay for
themselves, rather than relying
on the state.
Now, that law came into effect
in February,
and it's only been used three
times.
Now, the Danish government may
have attracted
lots of international criticism
for its methods,
but ministers say that there are
other European
countries that are seeking their
advice about
how to reduce their numbers.
With Syria still spinning out of
control and
Europe's migration crisis
showing no sign
of abating, does Denmark feel
the need to
toughen its stance still
further, a question
for the government's migration
spokesman,
Marcus Knuth.
MARCUS KNUTH, Liberal Party:
Part of the reason
why we have such a low influx of
asylum seekers
right now is also because of the
E.U. deal
with Turkey.
If that deal breaks, if there's
more trouble
in the Middle East and so forth,
everything
can change.
So, right now, we're happy that
the situation
seems to be under control.
But there are so many factors
out there that
things can change.
MALCOLM BRABANT: A strong police
presence
forces refugee supporters to
keep their distance
from a monthly anti-Muslim
demonstration.
They demand asylum for all,
while the right-wingers
deplore the growth of Islam.
The migration crisis is
polarizing European
society.
Although the numbers prepared to
demonstrate
on the streets aren't great,
opinion polls
show sentiments expressed at
gatherings like
this are gaining traction, not
just in Denmark,
but across the continent.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Copenhagen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: With the U.S.
health care system
undergoing its biggest changes
in decades,
health experts are looking to an
unexpected
place, sub-Saharan Africa, for
inspiration.
Throughout the continent,
ordinary citizens
are routinely trained as
community health
workers.
As Sarah Varney reports on the
lessons to
learn, this story was produced
in collaboration
with our partner Kaiser Health
News.
SARAH VARNEY: Destini Belton is
on a mission
to improve health outcomes in
Harlem.
She's not a doctor or a nurse,
but she knows
this neighborhood and the people
who live
here.
Belton goes where clinics and
hospitals can't,
into patients' homes, to
understand the mundane,
but vital details of their
lives.
DESTINI BELTON, Community Health
Worker: Hi.
How are you?
Oh, your hair looks nice now.
How are you feeling?
JESSICA GONZALEZ, Diabetes
Sufferer: OK.
SARAH VARNEY: She visits people
like Jessica
Gonzalez, who was blinded by
uncontrolled
type one diabetes at age 22.
DESTINI BELTON: Let me take your
blood pressure.
SARAH VARNEY: Now 33, Gonzalez
has high blood
pressure, high cholesterol and
renal disease,
and Belton worries that she has
trouble keeping
her medications straight because
she can't
see them.
DESTINI BELTON: You take most of
them during
what time of the day?
JESSICA GONZALEZ: During the day
or after
breakfast.
DESTINI BELTON: During the day.
SARAH VARNEY: Gonzalez is
reluctant to admit
her struggles to her doctor, but
she trusts
Belton to understand.
JESSICA GONZALEZ: With your
doctor, you don't
really want to say what you eat,
so I'm able
to tell her like, really, if I'm
not going
well, or, you know, if I sneaked
and cheated.
I tell her the right things, and
she helps
me.
MANMEET KAUR, City Health Works:
East Harlem
in particular has the highest
rate of diet-related
diseases in New York.
SARAH VARNEY: Manmeet Kaur has
trained a small
team of these community health
workers in
New York City.
MANMEET KAUR: East Harlem in
particular has
the highest rate of diet-related
diseases
in New York.
SARAH VARNEY: The organization,
called City
Health Works, contracts with
primary care
providers, like Mount Sinai
Health System,
to better manage their most
difficult patients.
WOMAN: Today, we're going to be
doing a workshop
on healthy beverages.
SARAH VARNEY: Nearly all of
their clients
are poor and facing chronic
illnesses that
frequently spiral out of
control.
They work to stabilize their
health and avoid
costly visits to the emergency
room and lengthy
hospital stays.
Employing community health
workers is a common
strategy elsewhere in the world.
In sub-Saharan Africa, community
health workers
have long formed the backbone of
health systems,
filling in gaps where doctors
and nurses are
in short supply.
It was Thandi Blie in Cape Town,
South Africa,
in fact, who helped to inspire
Kaur to start
City Health Works.
THANDI BLIE, Mamelani Projects:
Hi.
Hello.
WOMAN: How are you?
THANDI BLIE: I'm fine.
Thank you.
And how are you, my dear?
WOMAN: I'm good.
THANDI BLIE: Long time no see.
SARAH VARNEY: They met when Kaur
worked with
a group called Mamelani
Projects, a nonprofit
that relies on regular women
like Blie to
help neighbors improve their
health habits.
THANDI BLIE: I remember, last
time, when we
met, you had issues or problems
about your
high blood problem.
SARAH VARNEY: Often by sharing
their own experience.
THANDI BLIE: Yes, because really
high blood
pressure is very dangerous.
I know it from me.
SARAH VARNEY: She often shares
how her once
high blood pressure led to a
stroke.
THANDI BLIE: I make the examples
about what
happens in me.
Then, as soon as I share maybe a
story, someone
say, and me too.
SARAH VARNEY: Long lines besiege
clinics and
hospitals in South Africa, where
apartheid-era
laws have left a legacy of
widespread poverty
and desperate health conditions.
Mamelani's health coaches say
that, just as
in New York City, those
realities are often
best confronted outside the
walls of medical
clinics by bringing health
education to areas
that need it most.
The women who've attended these
classes are
making lasting changes to their
own health
and in the wider community.
Mickey Linda used her own
pension to start
a soup kitchen after hearing
that neighbors
were taking powerful drugs to
treat HIV on
empty stomachs.
With nutrition training from
Mamelani, she
now cooks up healthier meals for
hundreds
of neighbors and serves as a
vital local health
resource, keeping watch over her
community.
MICKEY LINDA, Started Soup
Kitchen: Because
doctors are not staying here.
Doctors are staying in town.
It's us who see that we can talk
about health
to them, because we are staying
together here.
It's us who see them, that this
is this problem
this problem.
SARAH VARNEY: Those close social
ties undergird
much of life in South Africa,
says Mamelani's
founder, Carly Tanur.
She and her team are working
closely with
Manmeet Kaur back in Harlem to
figure out
how Mamelani's model could be
incorporated
more broadly into the U.S.
health care system.
But here in Harlem, the question
is, how can
this model fit into a sprawling
hospital system
like Mount Sinai, especially at
a time when
health care leaders are
searching for ways
to control the cost of caring
for chronically
ill patients?
With Medicare now penalizing
providers for
some preventable conditions,
there are stronger
financial incentives to steady
the turbulent
lives of people like Jeanette
Rodriguez.
JEANETTE RODRIGUEZ, New York: I
was in emergency
last two Fridays ago because I
fell in the
street.
SARAH VARNEY: Destini Belton is
her go-to
problem-solver, filling out
paperwork for
benefits, helping her find a
caregiver program
for her father.
But she's also a liaison for
Rodriguez's own
medical needs.
DESTINI BELTON: So, the main
things we're
going to ask when we get up
there to the doctor
is about your back.
SARAH VARNEY: At a nearby Mount
Sinai clinic,
that preparation has paid off.
DR. Joseph Truglio tells
Rodriguez she may
have had a mild stroke.
DR.
JOSEPH M. TRUGLIO, Mount Sinai
Clinic: I know
that's got to be pretty hard to
hear that
that might have been something
that happened.
SARAH VARNEY: Rodriguez had
dismissed the
tingling on her right side as
arthritis, but
Belton's insistence and long
relationship
with her ensured Dr. Truglio
would hear about
it.
Plugging into their patients'
electronic health
records, Kaur wants to make
coaches an indispensable
part of the health care system
by professionalizing
their role and proving their
financial value.
MANMEET KAUR: We work with
clinics to determine,
how do we integrate our team
into their operations?
And that we know has resulted in
patients
feeling very confident in the
services we
provide, but also the doctors
feeling really
confident that they know more of
what's going
on with their patients.
SARAH VARNEY: But Kaur goes home
each night
to one of her biggest skeptics.
Her husband, Dr. Prabhjot Singh,
is helping
Mount Sinai figure out whether
there's enough
evidence that efforts like City
Health Works
should be integrated more fully
into Mount
Sinai's business.
DR.
PRABHJOT SINGH, Mount Sinai: I
think the thought
that comes up a lot of my
colleagues, and
frankly my own, is, how do you
do this for
40,000 people, 50,000 people at
the scale
of the Mount Sinai Health
System?
SARAH VARNEY: Singh heads the
Department of
Health System Design and Global
Health at
Mount Sinai.
DR.
PRABHJOT SINGH: We actually have
to know whether
or not the relationship between
Destini and
her client is effective.
It may feel really good, but,
from a health
system perspective, and also
just looking
at health improvement, we have
to really understand,
is she getting healthier and are
we doing
it in a cost-effective way?
SARAH VARNEY: There are early
signs the program
is working.
Patients with health coaches
cost $600 a month
less in medical care than a
control group,
a strong indication that coaches
are preventing
expensive medical emergencies.
And for half the patients,
coaches alerted
doctors about urgent needs that
they weren't
aware of.
While the program has worked
well for people
like Jessica Gonzalez and
Jeanette Rodriguez,
City Health Works remains a
small venture,
supported largely by foundations
interested
in testing the model.
But the ultimate aim is to have
public and
private insurers around the
country pay for
thousands of coaches like
Destini Belton,
creating stronger ties between
neighbors,
like in sub-Saharan Africa, to
help poor communities
take control of their own
health.
For the "PBS NewsHour" and
Kaiser Health News,
I'm Sarah Varney.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can learn
about a community
health initiative taking place
in New York
that aims to protect residents
from unsafe
summer temperatures.
That's on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our
"NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye
that might be
of interest to you, too.
The mineral topaz comes in a
wide range of
hues and saturations, and one
British museum
is about to unveil what it says
is the biggest
cut specimen of its color and
clarity.
The "NewsHour"'s Julia Griffin
took a closer
look.
JULIA GRIFFIN: At 9,381
glittering carats,
the Ostro stone is being called
the largest
topaz of its kind.
The electric blue, oval-cut
stone is nearly
six inches long, 4.5 inches
wide, and weighs
nearly 4.5 pounds.
MAURICE OSTRO, Entrepreneur and
Philanthropist:
Having tried to hold it for
photography, I
can tell you it is very heavy.
JULIA GRIFFIN: British
entrepreneur and philanthropist
Maurice Ostro recently gave the
gemstone to
London's Natural History Museum
on a permanent
loan.
MAURICE OSTRO: What is amazing
about this
stone is not just its size.
It's its quality.
The color, the intensity of the
blue and the
clarity of the stone are what
makes it so
exceptionally rare.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Ostro's father,
Max, discovered
the original rough topaz in the
Amazon rain
forest in 1986, but the cut
stone has been
locked away for three decades.
After his father's death,
Maurice Ostro thought
it was time for the public to
enjoy the gemstone's
beauty.
The museum's mineral curator,
Mike Rumsey,
hopes the topaz will help spark
interest in
the wider collection.
MIKE RUMSEY, London Natural
History Museum:
It will tell us another bit of
the natural
story.
So you start off with that rough
mineral,
which is all kind of quite
interesting, and
I really like that as a
scientist.
And then we do things to it, and
we will change
it.
We will cut it into something,
and this is
really a fantastic example of
the way in which
we have crafted something out of
nature.
JULIA GRIFFIN: The Ostro stone
now joins other
topaz record holders in their
own color categories.
The 21,000-carat light blue
Brazilian Princess
topaz lives at the American
Museum of Natural
History in New York, while the
31,000-carat
reddish-orange El-Dorado topaz
belongs to
the Programa Royal Collections
in Spain.
The Ostro stone will go on
display October
19.
But jewel thieves, including
Pink Panther
prowlers, beware.
The museum has pledged to boost
security to
protect the gemstone.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Julia Griffin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pretty stunning.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.